Okay. So packaging and the fact that it
is the highest value in some sense,
what we are teaching in this class is
only what I would call
20 percent of the overall amount of materials.
This is not to say that this is just
some pre-designed bug that we just use as a standard package.
Packaging is used to be considered like an art in itself,
but now increasingly because of the heat issues,
people no longer speak about
integrated software in the package separately.
Instead, they talk about packaging of systems.
That means that
heat core design or thermal core design has to be a part of the IC design process itself.
Unfortunately, as far as I know,
only one course in any of the IITs in India,
IIT Bombay, actually teaches IC design in that way.
Even our VLSI design program over here,
talks about IC design in isolation more or less.
It doesn't make all the grammars. Can I help you?
Yes, please.
Okay.
See, if you can send all the stuff together at one point,
I'll be able to help you.
But if you keep coming every five minutes to interrupt me,
that's not really the problem.
Please, please, please don't.
So, the issue is that this kind of
fragmented knowledge forces people to take
electives in domains that they don't consider their own.
For instance, mechanical engineering has a big input here because heat transfer is
a central part of
that study.
As a part of the ISN-India's Immigration Commission,
the most publicly publicized part of this is
for me and I, could probably participate in initiative.
Which can also be a part of .
So, one of the lift well know concepts,
they have a lot of people going there.
I will try to figure out something out for you.
They remain at least one guysbelen beras in compliance with theceeding.
I would like to ask you that question recordings there.
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. No problem.
Okay. Thank you.
Yes.
Yes Puwał...
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes followed by the Infrastructure Again.
Okay. Yes. Yes. Yes. Uh...black background and one of the rest publications
who is actually going there too?
I know parts of activism are even in the whole education system when it comes to this part of technology research and development.
And there, certain new VTech or MTech programs are going to be offered in a few years,
which are entirely geared about taking elements of various traditional practices of engineering
and offering them as, you know, semiconductor devices or something like that.
So this packaging issue is not just something that you can learn later on your own.
I recommend that if you are interested in going into this field, start looking for corresponding electives,
because you will not have the time to learn heat transfer from scratch after you've completed your VTech,
or you're late into your MTech, etc. It's just one of the matters.
Then we shall come back to this.
We'll start it, resume our discussion.
This part was prompted by a student question.
But then we resume our discussion on what happens to carrier wave functions in various kinds of materials,
starting from the understanding that only in a perfectly periodic crystal do you have black-hot scattering.
In any room temperature case, you will not have a perfect crystal.
You will have vibrations, which give rise to virtual particles known as phonons.
In a second quantization sense, interact with carriers, and that leads to scattering.
We defined an R-space, which is easy enough to understand, in one dimension, two dimensions, and three dimensions.
But there is a dual space to that, which arises from Fourier transforms, which is also periodic.
And if you are starting in the Bravais lattice, one of those 14 lattices,
then its dual space is known as a reciprocal lattice.
And the reciprocal lattice is guaranteed to be also a Bravais lattice.
Of course, there is no guarantee that Bravais lattice A maps into reciprocal lattice A.
It could be B, where B is also a set of initial Bravais lattices that we started with.
Then we had a simple class problem.
We defined planes, classes of planes.
We defined families of planes which are parallel to each other, or depending upon the nature of symmetry.
They may even be orthogonal, but they have the same symmetry in that direction.
The practical influence of understanding of planes is that it allows you to
please wafers without actually shattering them and losing a lot of material,
and also causing edge issues, because you want to use the entire real estate as much as possible.
We defined waferents in real space, corresponding to that,
because of the relationship between the periodicity r and the periodicity k,
is that if ikr, essentially, is equal to a constant, or 1, depending on your normalization,
is also a waferent.
So if r is a waferent, k is also a waferent.
That's the property of plane waves.
Then we formally defined the reciprocal lattice, and we expanded on the Fourier part.
Let's today connect this more to crystallography.
You've all seen Miller's analysis? Have you?
No.
So those of you who did coordinate geometry, and I think it was all of you in 11th grade,
you know how to write down the equation of a plane, right?
One of the canonical forms of the equation of a plane is a dot n equal to a constant, right?
Which is also the biggest discussion.
So, Miller indices, in that sense, are an exercise in finding the normal to the plane.
As long as you can write the normal to the plane, which is the equation of the plane effectively,
you can figure out where the indices are.
So, the area vector for a plane is picked to be parallel to the shortest reciprocal lattice vector.
So notice that, in coordinate geometry, the direction that is perpendicular to the plane is also in r3.
Right?
So, if you're starting with a plane arbitrarily oriented in r3,
then the vector that is perpendicular is also in r3.
But here we're making a departure from that.
We're saying that if you have a plane in real space,
then its vertical is a point in reciprocal space which has a k-position vector.
It's just a change of terminology. That is all there.
Let me repeat.
If you have a plane which is arbitrarily oriented in r3,
I find it's normal.
The coordinates, which is basically a triplet,
is a point in k-space.
Same coordinates.
So, let's say 3, 1, 5.
Those are coordinates in k-space for the dual vector.
So, if you have a plane in this direction, it maps to a point.
A position vector, to be more precise.
Yes?
You're taking the normal to that plane and then mapping it to a point in k-space.
You're just taking those coordinates and we will describe,
because obviously people who work in crystallography
are not very comfortable with working on Fourier analysis.
So, they have their own way of arriving at the same thing,
which I'll describe how to construct a Miller index.
It is essentially the same process.
If you have done a little bit of linear algebra,
which I believe you have done,
you can work out the steps and you'll say,
okay, yeah, these two treatments are exactly equivalent.
Sir, but for a plane like,
we can't only depend on one model vector.
We should also have a point, right?
So, we will have to consider that when doing this.
Which point?
Meaning, if you have a normal vector,
infinite planes which have a normal vector.
Yeah.
So, all you say is that if I define its normal vector,
any normal which is a scalar multiple of that normal vector
will also serve as a normal vector.
What we're trying to find over here is the minimum normal vector.
But I'm telling you that if there are infinite planes
for the same normal vector, right?
Yes, yes, yes.
So, this basically goes back to our previous discussion,
where families of planes corresponded to a single point in k-space.
Okay.
So, how do you construct a family of planes
that are all parallel to each other?
So, that discussion is exactly equivalent.
So, you pick a parallel,
but you pick the shortest reciprocal lattice vector
and let us express that in three unit coordinates,
or rather three unit vectors,
in the linear space defined by b1, b2, b3,
which I have bolded there.
How do you construct it?
It is the smallest integral coefficient
in reciprocal space.
So, you basically write it as,
so if you have like this coordinate system in,
I think, red or black?
Yeah, black.
It is in real space.
Then you construct a coordinate system in red.
That is the corresponding coordinate system in k-space.
So, they are not, so black is r3,
red is k3.
And we are finding out
the corresponding minimum intercepts
a by h, b by k and c by l.
And we are trying to find out h, k and l,
which are the smallest integers
which will make this possible.
So, for instance, you have got 7 by 11 or something.
Then 11 is the corresponding, you know,
coordinate I have to worry about.
Can you repeat it?
So, what we are trying to do over here is,
we are trying to find out coordinates in b-space,
which is, you know, effectively mapping of k-space,
h, k, l,
so that you have b by,
you are finding h, k and l,
so that they are the smallest possible integer multiples
in each direction.
Yeah?
The numbers you said.
Yeah?
The numbers you said, 7, 5, 11, I didn't get.
So, we will give you a worked example.
You will probably understand from that more clearly.
So, crystallographic definition,
which is independent of, you know,
Fourier definition is that
it is the inverse proportionality of intercepts in real space.
So, for instance,
if I have an arbitrarily oriented plane,
which has intercepts,
let's say x1, x2, x3,
then the corresponding 1 over x1,
1 over x2,
1 over x3,
expressed in smallest integer form,
will be the corresponding h, k, l's.
I take the inverse,
and I find out the l, c, m, in some sense,
for those,
and those are h, k, l's,
with no bound factors.
So, for hexagonal and robohedral lattices,
it is more convenient to use four indices,
even though we are not talking about a four-dimensional space,
because there is an additional axis,
which is a c-axis in the road direction,
you would present that using the fourth index.
This is just specific to these two crystal structures.
It is not necessary,
it is entirely possible to express it in three,
because it's after all,
after a k3, you don't need more than that,
but you can have an over-determined plane,
for instance.
It is equivalent to saying that,
okay, I've got three non-polar points,
and they define my plane,
and I just happen to pick another fourth point
on the same plane to define my plane.
Makes no difference, really speaking.
So, why do we do that?
It's easier to express it,
because there are, you know, additional axes here.
So, let's do a class problem,
and that will hopefully clear up some of these doubts.
So, here is the problem.
This plane in red, light red,
I hope everybody can see that.
It has these points defined,
a and b,
and the Miller indices,
for this indicated plane.
All right, so how many of these,
what you heard is just one point.
You'll remember again and again from our Himalayan class,
were also an episode three.
Sir, did I also drink another body of water?
Yeah.
That's obvious, right?
Because Z cure is 0 in both cases.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
of irrational points, like it could occur.
Of course, we have got non-periodic systems
like polycrystalline and morpher systems,
they're not periodic either.
Those are non-irrational examples of non-periodic systems.
So for the non-periodic system,
we cannot define the Fourier transform
or there are no .
Well, how would you calculate
a Fourier transform in practicality?
You would do something like a DFT,
a speed Fourier transform.
Or we can do it for some, within a particular domain,
we can calculate the Fourier transform
for as long as we know the values, right?
But you'll always have a scatter.
Because I'll have basically kind of an excellent data process
which never terminates, right?
I say that, okay, this point lies between this and this,
and you say, no, it's actually finer than that,
it's finer than that, and the process never concludes.
So ask yourself, how do I construct this crystal?
Can you place it at that point?
And that that point is not well defined, right?
Okay, so now let's connect wave function, this structure.
I mentioned this expression
when we talked about two different energy regimes,
where Uwm is the cell function,
which is the part of the wave function
that represents the strong interaction between an electron,
and an .
and the second part
is a familiar plane wave
so if you had
open, like you know
the universe constructed of
an infinite space
and only one electron
e to the power ikr would be a sufficient
representation of what that electron wave function
would be, right, because it doesn't interact
with anything because nothing else exists
in fact, John Archibald
was a physicist
was a PhD advisor of Richard Feynman
he had this theory that there is only
one electron in the entire universe and everything else
is a motion transferred copy of that
pretty crazy idea
but it seems to fit the facts
so
the cell function of the kernel
is what we are defining as
u sub n, it interacts with the lattice
crystals
this is important to understand that even though
we talk about
crystals having symmetry
but the act of construction of the crystal
actually breaks space symmetry
because space symmetry says that all directions
in R3 are equivalent
so once I construct a crystal
I say that okay, some directions are more special
than others
and as a result, first of all there is symmetry breaking
that occurs, so all directions are not
equivalent, so this for example
is a diamond crystal lattice
which is what silicon and germanium
condense into
so just there as an example
so what does that depend upon?
each will break symmetry in one way or the other
once you have a crystal then there is periodicity
but when you say periodicity
and you try to construct a miller index
you are still saying that there are at least
three special directions
periodicity is different from symmetry
periodicity is what I would say
okay
I think there is a slight abuse of terminology over here
what we are talking about basic symmetry in R3 is
isotropicity of space
that all directions are equivalent
the moment I impose a crystal
that basic R3 symmetry is broken
and we say that the resulting space is anisotropic
and now within that
anisotropic space we have got periodicity
and that periodicity
in the sense of a group theory
obviously imposes a certain set of
special directions in which there is
periodicity and hence
that is symmetry
so we are using
symmetry in two different terms
in two different ways
they are actually
it is correct to use the word symmetry over here
because R3 symmetry is the basic symmetry of all
which is basically
I think it is called
n-fold or something
okay never mind
what it is called
it is been a while since I have read these things
but
isotropicity
and symmetry combined together
those two terms will actually clarify
what we are talking about
so isotropicity is broken
which is also known as R3 symmetry
so it is like when you didn't have a crystal
that any vectoring
R3 was equally probable
or there was no special energy direction anywhere
so when you impose a crystal
so that say a particular direction became more favourable for that crystal
more favourable or less favourable
less favourable
and non-equivalent basically
that is what we are trying to say
what is the fact that over here
the kernel is u sub n
I call it the self-function
and it is also known as kernel in many treatments
now mobility
I have still not
I have not defined mobility please note
I have not given the units of mobility
I have not defined what unity is
mobility is in
you know what is the right-hand side of that equation
but mobility we
can right now state
it is the measure of how easy it is for a carrier to move
carrier or electron?
electron is a carrier
there is going to be a second carrier introduced to this discussion
that I am generalizing into a carrier
so it is a strong function of scattering interactions
the more scattering you have
the harder it is for the carrier to move
right?
can everybody understand that?
okay
so one thing that happens in this entire process is that
we start with the assumption that electron for instance
has a mass of 9.11
10 to the power minus 31 kilograms
in semiconductor devices
we don't use that mass much
instead we replace it with something called an effective mass
and I will describe two ways
two distinct and two distinct ways in which that is constructed
so that is what I am
so is that because of rest mass or moving mass?
no
that is relativity
in that case if your speed goes up the mass goes up
no that is not what you are talking about
so let us now
describe the first of those two masses
there are two ways of defining effective mass
both are necessary for you to understand
because both are needed in different contexts
so let us first define a kinematic effective mass
so when a carrier moves through crystal it interacts with what?
so when a carrier moves through crystal it interacts with what?
the lattice
that is the obvious culprit right?
other carriers
electron-electron interactions or hole-hole interactions
and also stuff that should not be there
impurities
Joukalski process
carbon impurities in silicon
that is what we are talking about
it is very different from free space transport
so if we write down the equation of motion
notice that I have pulled m inside the derivative
ok?
because I am writing the rate of change of momentum there
is equal to three different forces
one is the externally applied force
so this could be a piece of silicon
and apply an electric field across it
that is an external force
the other is periodic force
I have got a crystal
the carrier moving in one direction is going to see the same kind of scattering
or roughly the same kind of scattering
modulo the temperature differences
as it hops from place to place
because the lattice structure of it is periodic in itself
and other?
unexpected things
like electron-electron interactions
after all it is not a single electron system
and the other thing is impurities
which break periodicity by the way
because if I have silicon
and I suddenly introduce a phosphorus atom in there
which is where you actually make n-type silicon
phosphorus has a different valency and a different covalent bonding
than silicon does
so it will disrupt the electron cloud
and break periodicity in that sense
ok sir can I ask a question?
periodicity what does that mean?
periodic is like if you have got an infinite silicon crystal
so if your electron is moving in a single direction
without getting captured in different directions
it is going to encounter the same kind of collisions
you know roughly
a given unit of time
like it is moving at a constant velocity
it is going to take time
we are just accounting it for the lattice forces
yes
just that f periodic is lattice
but the lattice may contain impurities
and that impurity part is an extra layer
so what?
so when we say periodic do we also account for lattice vibrations being the same?
no we don't
we in fact I mentioned that earlier in this lecture
we replace vibrations with the quasi particles
and then that would get pushed into f other
because f other contains everything else that is not a part of the perfect lattice
or an externally invited force
now how do you track the motion of any carrier?
one electron?
I read on the equation of motion I tried to track that one electron?
one electron? I read on the equation of motion I tried to track that one electron?
see those of you who were getting a slight sense of Deja Vu
from maybe 10th grade or 11th grade
where you started talking about how
solid bodies can be replaced with a single centre of mass
and treat it as a particle
this direction this discussion is going to be somewhat similar
in spirit
not in detail
so
we're gonna say okay this is external force acting on it
this is a force acting on it from the lattice itself and this is from everything else, right?
I can't do it, right?
if I can't do it, no problem!
I can't do it, right?
Well, that's easy enough to do for one particle. If you have any silicon crystal, let's say
containing a mole of silicon atoms, like Avogadro number, do you write down 10 to the power
of 53 such equations? No. See, it's the same kind of reasoning as you use for the rigid
bodies. So, mathematically that problem is intractable. So, what I do instead is that
we modify the definition of mass itself. So, I replace m0 with mn star, n refers to electron.
This is going to be a kind of protocol going forward. n refers to electron and t refers
to hole. We will come to a hole in a short while. So, what refers to star? Star is the
particle indicating that it's not your normal mass. It's an effective mass.
